Isidoros of Charax, Parthian Stations (Credits: ToposText)

Isidore Of Charax, Parthian Stations, translated by Wilfred Harvey Schoff (1874-1932), London 1914, a work in the public domain placed online by Parthia.com and others, translation revised by Brady Kiesling from the 1839 E. Miller Greek text at Google books. This text has 43 tagged references to 23 ancient places.
CTS URN: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0070.tlg001; Wikidata ID: Q87743341; Trismegistos: authorwork/8054     [Open Greek text in new tab]

§ 1.1  Through Mesopotamia and Babylonia, 171 schoeni [roughly 5 km per schoenus, one hour at caravan pace]
through Apolloniatis, 33 sch.
through Chalonitis 21 sch.
through Media 22 sch.
through Kambadene 31 sch.
through Upper Media 38 sch.
through Media Rhagiane 58 sch.
through Choarene 19 sch.
through Komisene 58 sch.
through Hyrkania 60 sch.
through Astauene 60 sch.
through Parthyene 25 sch.
through Apauartikene 27 sch.
through Margiane 30 sch.
through Aria 30 sch.
through Anabe 55 sch.
through Drangiane 21 sch.
through Sakastane 63 sch.
through Arachosia 36 sch.
Total 858 schoeni


§ 1.2  Mesopotamia and Babylonia 171 schoeni: For those who cross the Euphrates, next to Zeugma is the city of Apameia, and then the village of Daiara. It is 3 schoeni distant from Apameia and the river Euphrates. Then Charax Sidae [or Spasinou], called by the Greeks the city of Anthemousias, 5 schoeni: beyond which is Koraia, in Batane, a fortified place: 3 schoeni. To the right of this place is Mannouorra Auyreth, a fortified place and a spring, from which the locals irrigate, 5 schoeni. Then Kommisimbela, a fortified place: by which flows the river Bilecha, 4 schoeni. Then Alagma, a fortified place, a royal station, 3 schoeni; beyond which is Ichnai, a Greek city, founded by the Macedonians: it is situated on the river Balicha: 3 schoeni. Then Nikephorion by the Euphrates, a Greek city, founded by King Alexander, 5 schoeni. Farther on, by the river, is Galabatha, a deserted village, 4 schoeni. Then the village of Choubane, 1 schoenus; whence Thillada Mirrada, a royal station , 4 schoeni. Then Basileia [royal palace], a sanctuary of Artemis, founded by Darius, a town; close by is the canal of Semiramis, and the Euphrates is dammed with rocks, so that by being constricted it will overflow the fields; in summer, however, it wrecks the boats; to this place, 7 schoeni.


§ 1.3  Then Allan, a town, 4 schoeni. Thence Biynau, a sanctuary of Artemis 4 schoeni. Then Phaliga, a village on the Euphrates (that means in Greek 'half-way' [or ms. 'autumnal']), 6 schoeni. From Antioch to this place, 120 schoeni; and from thence to Seleucia on the Tigris, 100 schoeni. Near Phaliga is the town of Nabagath, and by it flows the river Abouras, which empties into the Euphrates; there the armies cross over to the Roman territory. Then the village of Asicha, 4 schoeni; beyond which is Doura city of Nicanor, founded by the Macedonians, also called by the Greeks Europus, 6 schoeni. Then Merra fort, town, 5 schoeni. Then the city of Giddan, 5 schoeni. Then Belesi Biblada, 7 schoeni. Beyond is an island in the Euphrates, 6 schoeni; there was the treasure of Phraates, who cut the throats of his concubines, which Tiridates who was exiled, invaded. Then Anatho, an island in the Euphrates, 4 stadia, on which is a city, 4 schoeni; beyond which is Thilabus [ms Olabous], an island in the Euphrates, whence a treasury of the Parthians, 2 schoeni. Then Izan, a city on an island, 12 schoeni. Then Aeipolis, where there are bituminous springs, 16 schoeni. Beyond is the city of Besechana, in which is a sanctuary of Atargatis, 12 schoeni. Then Neapolis by the Euphrates, 22 schoeni. From that place those crossing the Euphrates and Narmalchan to Seleucia on the Tigris, 9 schoeni. Mesopotamia and Babylonia reach this far; and from Zeugma to Seleucia there are 171 schoeni.


§ 2  From that place begins Apolloniatis, which extends 33 schoeni. It has villages, in which a station; and a Greek city, Artemita; through the midst of which flows the river Silla. To that place from Seleucia is 15 schoeni. But now the city is called Chalasar.


§ 3  From there to Chalonitis, 21 schoeni; with five villages, in which a station, and a Greek city, Chala, 15 schoeni beyond Apolloniatis. Then, after 5 schoeni, a mountain which is called Zagros, which forms the boundary between the district of Chalonitis and that of the Medes.


§ 4  From that place, Media, which extends 22 schoeni. The beginning is at the district of Karina; in which there are 5 villages in which a station, but no city.


§ 5  From that place, Kambadene, which extends 31 schoeni, with 5 villages, in which a station, and a city, Bagistana [Baptana], situated on a mountain; there is a statue and a pillar of Semiramis.


§ 6  From that place, Upper Media, 38 schoeni; and at the very beginning of it the city of Konkobar; then a sanctuary of Artemis, 3 schoeni. Then Bazigraban [Maziniaman], which is a custom house, 3 schoeni. Thence to Adrapana [Adragianas], the royal residence of those who ruled in Ecbatana [Batana], and which Tigranes the Armenian destroyed, 4 schoeni. Then Ecbatana [Apobatana], the metropolis of Media and treasury, and a sanctuary where they always sacrifice to Anaitis, 12 schoeni. Next in order are 3 villages in which a station.


§ 7  From that place [Rhagiane] Media, [58] schoeni. In it are 10 villages, and 5 cities. After 7 schoeni are Raga and Charax; of which Rhaga is the greatest of the cities in Media. And in Charax the first king Phraates settled the Mardi; it is beneath a mountain, which is called Caspios, beyond which are the Caspian Gates.


§ 8  Further on, for those passing beyond the Caspian Gates there is a narrow valley, and Choarene [19 schoeni]; in which is the city of Apameia, after 4 schoeni; and there are 4 villages in which a station.


§ 9  Beyond is Comisene, 58 schoeni, in which there are 8 villages with a station, but there is no city.


§ 10  Beyond is Hyrkania, 60 schoeni, in which there are 11 villages with stations.


§ 11  Beyond is Astabene, 60 schoeni, in which 12 villages with stations; and the city of Asaak, in which Arsaces was first proclaimed king; and an eternal fire is guarded there.


§ 12  Beyond is Parthyene, 25 schoeni; within which is a valley, and the city of Parthaunisa after 6 schoeni; there are royal tombs. But the Greeks call it Nisaia. Then the city of Gathar after 6 schoeni. Then the city of Sirok after 5 schoeni. It has only one village, which is called Saphri.


§ 13  Beyond is Apavarktikene, 27 schoeni, in which is the city of Apavarktike. Then the city of Ragau and two villages.


§ 14  Beyond is Margiane, 30 schoeni. There is the Antiocheia called unwatered; there are no villages.


§ 15  Beyond is Areia, 30 schoeni. There are the city of Candake and the city of Artakavan and Alexandreia of Areia; and 4 villages.


§ 16  Beyond is Anauon, a region of Areia, 55 schoeni, in which is a very great city, Phra, and the city of Bis, and the city of Gari and the city of Nioi; but there is no village.


§ 17  Beyond is Zarangiana [Drangiane], 21 schoeni. There are the city of Parin and the city of Korok.


§ 18  Beyond is Sakastene of the Sakai Scythians, which is also Paraitakene, 63 schoeni. There are the city of Barda and the city of Min and the city of Palakenti and the city of Sigal; in that place is the royal residence of the Sakai; and nearby is the city of Alexandreia and nearby is the city of Alexandropolis, and 6 villages.


§ 19  Beyond is Arachosia, 36 schoeni. And the Parthians call this White India; there are the city of Biyt and the city of Pharsaga and the city of Chorochoad and the city of Demetrias; then Alexandropolis, the metropolis of Arachosia; it is Greek, and by it flows the river Arachotos. As far as this place the land is under the rule of the Parthians.


END